
\section{Conclusion}

In this paper, we have begun to understand the relationship between
multi-operation, multi-object transactions and high availability. We
have outlined requirements for high availability in a transactional
context, or Highly Available Transactions (HATs) and taxonomized
guarantees spanning both distributed systems and ACID database
literature accordingly. Many transactional guarantees are achievable
with high availability, while a few, like preventing Lost Update and
Write Skew, are not. To understand the benefits of high availability
and low latency, we classified the prevalence and cost of partitions
and network latency both in the literature and via experiment, while
analyzing existing transactions to determine whether HATs were
sufficient to ensure application consistency.

Fundamentally, high availability represents a new constraint for
database designs. While the CAP Theorem has had a large impact on
distributed data storage design, our knowledge of database systems has
not kept pace. The key distributed systems challenge of designing
distributed algorithms and architectures for partial failure and
network asynchrony is largely unaddressed in the literature on
transaction processing systems. We believe that, in order to fully
realize the potential of HAT systems, further rearchitecture and study
of existing database designs as well as better understanding of
application semantics and their relationship to distributed
consistency will be necessary.
